#+TITLE: [Guide] The lengthy bracelet, band and watch strap primer
#+SUBTITLE: /orgmode adaptation via/ =pandoc -o output.org index.html=
#+OPTIONS: toc:4

* TOC :TOC_4:noexport:
- [[#about][About]]
- [[#guide-the-lengthy-bracelet-band-and-watch-strap-primer][[Guide] The lengthy bracelet, band and watch strap primer]]
  - [[#bracelet-styles][Bracelet Styles]]
    - [[#link-style-bracelets-oyster-president-jubilee-][Link-style bracelets (Oyster, President, Jubilee, ...)]]
  - [[#mesh-shark-mesh-milanaise][Mesh, Shark Mesh, Milanaise]]
  - [[#expansionelasticflex-bracelet][Expansion/Elastic/Flex Bracelet]]
  - [[#bracelet-links][Bracelet Links]]
  - [[#quality][Quality]]
  - [[#sizing][Sizing]]
  - [[#straps-and-bands][Straps and Bands]]
    - [[#leather][Leather]]
    - [[#exotic-leathers][Exotic Leathers]]
    - [[#synthetic-rubber-plastic-caoutchouc-silicone][Synthetic (Rubber, plastic, caoutchouc, silicone...)]]
      - [[#famous-examples][Famous examples:]]
    - [[#canvas-nato-zulu][Canvas, Nato, Zulu]]
      - [[#the-bond-strap][The "Bond" strap]]
    - [[#attachment-and-endlinks][Attachment and Endlinks]]
      - [[#sizing-and-swapping][Sizing and Swapping]]
      - [[#buckles-and-clasps][Buckles and clasps]]
- [[#conclusion][Conclusion]]

* About
- Original post published in February 2015 by user 'nephros':
  + [[https://www.reddit.com/r/Watches/comments/2vbc6w/guide_the_lengthy_bracelet_band_and_watch_strap/]]
- Transcript made in August 2021 by:
  + [[mailto:manuel.fuica.morales@gmail.com][manuel.fuica.morales@gmail.com]]
* [Guide] The lengthy bracelet, band and watch strap primer
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: guide-the-lengthy-bracelet-band-and-watch-strap-primer-1
  :CLASS: _eYtD2XCVieq6emjKBH3m
  :END:

** Bracelet Styles
*** Link-style bracelets (Oyster, President, Jubilee, ...)

Named after the Rolex models they most commonly appear on, these three
are by far the most common styles of bracelet:

- [[http://www.luxurytyme.com/Daydate/ss-catalog3.jpg][Oyster]]

- [[http://www.luxurytyme.com/Daydate/clasp1.jpg][President]]

- [[http://www.watchcentre.com/lg_images/04081101%5B2%5D.jpg][Jubilee]]

Other common bracelet constructions:

- [[http://imgur.com/NA0ckk5][H-style]], an Oyster variant (or the other
  way around)

- [[http://www.ofrei.com/images/020ST3010000.jpg][Beads-of-Rice]], a
  variant of the jubilee with rice-shaped center links

- [[http://imgur.com/GU9kQ1M][(Super) Engineer]] a chunky,
  checkerboard-like construction

All these may be ornamented using different variants of polishing,
plating or varying materials, creating two-tone, brushed-and-mirror
finish etc. looks to match the watch case.

** Mesh, Shark Mesh, Milanaise

Mesh bracelets are made of small ring-like components weaved together in
a mesh of varying degrees of tightness.\\
This can make them look and feel more like a canvas strap rather than a
link bracelet.\\
The finer mesh look is a bit dated today, but that can be fitting
depending on the watch (for example mid-20th century gold dress watches,
and many ladies watches).

A "shark mesh" uses relatively large rings and is named after the
chainmail "sharksuit" used in diving. To be a "true" shark mesh the
rings go directly onto the springbar, but many have a tube-like end for
the springbar.

A "Milanaise" bracelet is strictly speaking as a mesh weave so tight it
will not lay flat on a surface, but is commonly used to mean any type of
finer mesh.

- [[http://imgur.com/TiwUiST][Mesh]]

- [[http://imgur.com/gBndWKI][Shark Mesh]]

- [[http://imgur.com/V3lOhKH][Fine mesh]]

- [[http://imgur.com/ZFAHPwc][Milanaise]]

** Expansion/Elastic/Flex Bracelet

A once-popular utilitarian generic replacement bracelet, a claspless
metal bracelet held together by small springs. Horribly out of date
today, they should be replaced whenever encountered. They also get
disgustingly filthy with use and are impossible to clean.

[[http://imgur.com/2MZJku3][Example]]

** Bracelet Links

These can be either folded or solid. The former is created by folding in
a sheet of metal and cut/mill to size. These are cheaper, lighter but
can have undesirable qualities such as ringing or rattling when moved,
or catching arm hair. Therefore solid links, which are cut/milled from a
solid piece of metal are generally preferred, but more expensive.

- [[http://imgur.com/lFbHeUl][folded link]]

Links, and the bars that hold them together wear out with time causing
the bracelet to be looser, louder and possibly less comfortable (and
eventually break).

** Quality

Can range from the absolute bottom level
shouldn't-even-touch-your-wrist-once ([[http://imgur.com/rmM2zbX][Vostok]]) to unbelievable attention to
detail ([[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bh1Xww576Yc][AP RO]]).

In the middle ground, there's not a huge difference in /comfort/ and
practicality between, say, the bracelet of a $400 Seiko diver or a $1k
Rolex oyster bracelet, however the finish will be noticeably higher
quality with more expensive ones. Also, the clasps can be all kinds of
nifty, see below.

** Sizing

If you're not going to do it often, getting your bracelet adjusted at
some local shop will probably the most hassle free option. But if you
want to do it yourself, here's some hints:

Bracelets are in general a bit trickier to fit to your wrist than straps
because you have to remove links from the bracelet. When adjusting the
size, keep in mind that your wrist circumference will change throughout
use, depending on climate, temperature, diet and other factors.

The details for adjusting depend on how the bracelet is made.
[[http://www.esslinger.com/howtoremovewatchbandlinks-2.aspx][This
guide]] should cover the gist of it. You don't strictly /need/ a
[[http://imgur.com/fJ3AVmn][pin-pushing tool]] for this, but this
author's (literally) bloody experience recommends using one.

Mesh bracelets may also have [[http://imgur.com/IQkffSB][removable
segments]], but most come with either [[http://imgur.com/iF48BmH][holes
and a tang buckle]], or a clasp that [[http://imgur.com/F5R4uIE][can be
moved along the bracelet]] itself to change the size.

Expansion bracelets are more or less one-size-fits all, but in case you
need to adjust one [[http://www.thewatchprince.com/Link-Removal-Instructions-Expansion][here's how]].

** Straps and Bands
*** Leather

The most common straps are leather straps. They come in many shapes and
colours, and materials - usually calf leather, but other, more exotic
animal skins are used as well (horse, lizard, snake, stingray,
crocodile, alligator, ostrich are common). Many include stitching to add
some ornament/colour/character to the strap.

- Textured leather: cattle skin that has been treated to look like
  other, more exotic animal skin

- Shell Cordovan leather: a specially procured type of horse leather
  famed for it's toughness and longevity

- other types of leather are a bit beyond scope of this guide, but
  [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leather][Wikipedia has more]]

Here also, quality can vary a lot, from $2 GENIUNE LEATHER to
four-figure hand-crafted pieces of art. A $20-$60 genuine leather strap
appears to suit most people and watches though, $100-$300 for fine
specimen.

*** Exotic Leathers

This is a matter of personal choice, but yours truly
would like to submit than except in rare cases, printed textured leather
should be preferred to genuine exotics. You don't have to be a vegan or
PETA member to show some respect for animals and their treatment and,
like with shoes, jackets, or handbags, genuine exotic animal skins are
problematic.

*** Synthetic (Rubber, plastic, caoutchouc, silicone...)

Most often seen with dive or other tool watches, but also common on more
stylish designs and even high-end luxury sometimes come on rubber.
Advantages include resistance to elements, easy cleaning and durability.
Rubber is also cheaper than bracelets or leather, so if you intend to
change the strap anyway, get it on rubber.\\
Other than that there's not much difference to leather straps.

**** Famous examples:

- [[http://imgur.com/PONIOrX][Citizen ND table]]

- [[http://imgur.com/m3iI9bE][Seiko Waffle]]

- [[http://imgur.com/mkGpfAR][ISOfrane diver strap]]

- [[http://imgur.com/JPfXFVN][Tropic]]

- [[http://www.sinn.de/en/bilder/Technikabc/einsatzzeitmesser.jpg][Sinn]]

- [[http://imgur.com/1aK9Q8h][AP]]

*** Canvas, Nato, Zulu

Straps made from woven fabric (originally, leather variants exist) .
They are more durable than leather, can be used with fixed lugs, and are
available in a variety of colours. Water resistance of course, making
them popular with divers. They will also keep the watch on the wrist
even if one of the springbars fails, and can be exchanged rather quickly
which has lead to their popularity with people who like to vary the
appearance of their watch.

- [[http://imgur.com/0SdNzZK][Basic canvas strap]]: functions much like
  normal leather straps.

- [[http://imgur.com/ZwI1XB1][RAF]] or
  [[http://imgur.com/YLxa2OE][Perlon]] slip-through strap: the most
  basic military attachment, it's a simple nylon strap with a buckle.

- [[http://imgur.com/Gb2b33O][3-ring "NATO" strap]]: the modernized
  version of the slip-through, it
  [[http://natozulu.com/content/9-nato-strap-instructions][attaches]] in
  a special way. Much could be said about this, but for more detailed
  information about NATO straps see the
  [[/r/watchescirclejerk][dedicated sub]].

- [[http://imgur.com/wWlcnva][5-ring "Zulu" strap]]: a more hefty
  variant of the NATO, it
  [[http://www.natozulu.com/content/12-zulu-5-ring-strap-instructions][attaches a bit differently]]

Keep an eye on quality when shopping, lower-grade ones tend to be rather
thin (not always a drawback) and may fray easily. The buckle can also be
quite horrible, especially on the Perlon type.

**** The "Bond" strap

One of the reasons the NATO strap has become so popular recently is the
way James bond wore his watch in the movie Goldfinger. The real James
Bond strap has 9 stripes of navy blue, olive green and bordeaux (there
are black-and-gray straps often marketed as "Bond").\\
It's also not a NATO strap - the NATO was introduced in the 80s, much
later than the movie. It's rather a slip-through Perlon strap, and it's
not narrower than the lugs would allow on purpose, rather there were no
straps of that width available at the time.

[[http://imgur.com/WBoGBiP][Bund/Cuff-link strap]]

A leather variant of the Perlon/slip-through strap which adds a pad of
leather between the watch and the wrist.

*** Attachment and Endlinks
**** Sizing and Swapping

[[http://www.esslinger.com/howtochangewatchbands.aspx][Here's]] a good guide on how to attach and detach watch bands.

The most important measurement here is the lug width: the space between
the lugs that must fit the spring bar and the band or bracelet endlinks.
This is measured in millimetres and standard sizes are even numbers.
Odd-sized are out there but rarer.\\
As a rule of thumb, odd-sized lug widths can accommodate one size larger
straps if they're soft enough (leather, rubber, canvas), or the strap
can be cut to size. Bracelet endlinks must fit exactly though.

For bands which taper towards the buckle, a second measurement is given
which must match the buckle or clasp width.

***** Spring bars

Spring bars are by far the most common method of fixing both bands and
bracelets to watch cases. [[http://www.ofrei.com/page475.html][They come
in many shapes]], and more importantly many sizes.

To remove and replace a spring bar a [[http://imgur.com/h3hmf13][Spring
bar tool]] is the preferred way of working with these (it's not required
though, for one-off jobs small screwdrivers or knives can be used). If
you intend to change straps often, get a tool though, they're cheap and
handy.

Make sure the springbar fits as firmly as possible (size up the bar if
in doubt), dropping mechanical watches is not fun.

***** Endlinks and shaped strap ends

If you want your bracelet to fit snugly around the case, you will have
to find the correct endlinks. [[http://imgur.com/ZyeO06N][This]] is an
example of a generic attachment without endlinks fitted to the case. It
does fit, but there is a gap between the end of the bracelet and the
case. Curved endlinks will bridge that gap and it will look
[[http://imgur.com/HWNA4uX][like this]].

- [[http://imgur.com/ZjRT5DA][hollow endlink]]: The cheap and common
  version, it's a piece of sheet metal in the right shape to hug the
  case, accept the spring bar and attach to the last link of the
  bracelet. The main advantage is the price, as it is much cheaper than
  the solid version. The drawback is generally a more loose connection,
  and rattling can occur.

- [[http://imgur.com/jKAW04i][solid endlink]]: The more desirable
  version, usually found in more expensive watches and bracelets, and
  custom pieces. A bit heavier, but also longer lasting.

Finding the correct endlink for a random bracelet and watch can be a
challenge, so endlinks should be bought together with the bracelet and
must fit the case and lug shape.

Rubber or leather straps also sometimes are shaped to hug the case or
lugs. This is a form of "proprietary" attachment and has the same
problems, as mentioned below.

***** Fixed/soldered lugs

These are usually found on older (pre-1950s) watches, often military
style but also many dress or trench watches. They consist of a simple
loop of wire soldered to the case or between the lugs.

There are special leather straps available which can be fixed to these
watches. They come either as an open loop that's slipped around the wire
and then glued, or have a clip of metal inside to fix the loop ends
together.

Slip-through straps like NATO/ZULU, canvas slip-through or Bund style
can also be used with these.

***** non-standard/proprietary/integrated band attachments

Some watch models and brands do not have a standard way of attaching
their straps and bracelets. This is most common with fashion watches,
but almost all manufacturers have models which do this.

- [[http://imgur.com/p9KvO8h][Swatch band]]

- [[http://cdn2.globalmediapro.com/att/a/2/d/5/a2d5m5/skagen_331xlslb.jpg][Skagen band]]

- [[http://www.hindablog.com/storage/Citizen%20Men's%20Black%20Dial.jpg][Citizen bracelet]]

- [[http://imgur.com/8i8cSoR][Royal Oak]]

These straps can be problematic because replacement depends on
availability. For some versions, straps can be cut to size or adapters
are available. For others, one must buy from the original manufacturer.

**** Buckles and clasps
***** Tang Buckle
[[http://imgur.com/hVLvKNQ][Tang Buckle]]

By far the most common for leather, rubber and canvas straps, not much
to be said about it, it works just like a belt buckle. They should match
the watch case in metal colour, and are usually attached using smaller
versions of spring bars (depending on the taper of the strap).

***** Sliding clasp
[[http://www.esslinger.com/ProductImages/watches/80.242.jpg][Sliding clasp]]

One of the possibilities to close a mesh bracelet. One end hooks into
the other and is secured by a flap that closes over it. It can slide
along the rest of the strap to adjust bracelet length. Sometimes seen on
leather as well.

***** Fold-over clasps
[[http://www.esslinger.com/images/products/display/80.431photo3.jpg][Fold-over clasps]]

The most common closing mechanism for bracelets. Fold-over clasps are a
three-piece construction that close under the wearer's wrist. Some have
a push button and/or and additional flap securing the closed clasp
against accidental opening.

***** Butterfly and deployant/deployment clasps
[[http://www.canong3.co.uk/sinnu1/pic22.jpg][Butterfly]] and [[http://imgur.com/e84MPmZ][Deployant/Deployment]] clasps

The version of the fold-over clasp for leather straps. It is normally
seen on higher-end straps because the lack of holes and tang puts less
strain on the band. The Butterfly is a double-sided version of the
deployant.

Again, push buttons are common to secure the closed clasp.

There are regular discussions about whether it's called a deployant or
deployment clasp, the latter is likely an erroneous anglicization of the
French /deployer/ (unfold). For practical purposes: both are used.

Depending on the details of the clasp, regular straps can be used, or
they may have to be cut to fit.

***** Other features

A [[http://imgur.com/czK2GRz][diver's extension]] expands the bracelet
quickly for use with diving suits. A
[[http://imgur.com/2gmX5XE][racheting clasp]] has a similar function but
allows finer adjustment.

* Conclusion

And that's all folks, hope you find this useful, or at least useful
enough to point someone here.

If you want to contribute, how about some comments on how to change
straps, adjust bracelets and affix clasps and such? Non-springbar
attachments? Cleaning/maintenance advice and so on is also missing here.

